Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Dr. Douglas
Fry. He's now professor emeritus of Peace and conflict
studies at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro
and also adjunct senior research scholar at the Advanced
Consortium on Cooperation, Conflict and Complexity at Columbia University.
And today we're going to talk about his new
book Advanced Introduction to Conflict Resolution. So Douglas, welcome
back to the show. It's always an immense pleasure
to talk with you.
Oh well, thank you Ricardo for that kind introduction
and your kind words, and it's an immense pleasure
for me as well.
Great. So I mean we've already talked on the
show twice about the anthropology of war and peace.
So today we're going to talk more specifically about
one aspect. That is associated with those topics that
is conflict resolution. So, uh, how do you approach
it from an anthropological perspective? I mean, from the
perspective of an anthropologist, what is conflict resolution?
That's a great place to start. It's always good
to get the terms out there. So in terms
of this book, I adopted for the most part,
a definition which I liked from a sociologist, a
scholar that's done a lot of work with with
peace and conflict studies, um, Kreisberg, and he defines
conflict resolution as the process of concluding a dispute
or conflict. In which the adversary parties, with or
without the assistance of mediators and negotiators and so
forth, negotiate or otherwise strive towards a mutually acceptable
agreement or understanding, taking into account each other's concerns.
And I, I think that's broad enough and yet
it's the key details that that I basically think
that's a good one to apply anthropologically as well,
meaning, of course, that it could apply across different
cultural circumstances. So, um, that's, that's my overall thought
on, on how to define it, um. When we're
talking anthropologically, we're going to be comparing cultures just
sort of inherently, and this would be a good
point, I think, to mention at the very beginning,
an overall perspective. I sometimes call it the umbrella
perspective on not just conflict resolution, but conflict management.
And there that's a bit broader than conflict resolution
because it includes some things which most people would
consider to be related to dealing with conflict, managing
conflict, preventing conflict, but not necessarily resolving the conflict.
So there have been various attempts to sort of
classify or create typologies of conflict management out there.
And one that I like and, and I've I've
used it in my writings quite a bit, is
by the now deceased sociologist Donald Black, who was
really a great theorist and and and and thinker
about all sorts of topics from social control to
conflict resolution and so forth. And he was also
pretty anthropological in the sense of including non-Western materials.
So in any case, what Black does is he
says, first of all, we could look at processes
in terms of them being bilateral, involving two parties.
And if you do that, he comes up with
four different bilateral approaches, um, basically. One is just
to avoid each other, just cease interaction. Uh, EITHER
total or partly short-term, long-term. So that's avoidance. And
you see, that's not necessarily resolving anything, but that,
that you're keeping the conflict at bay, so to
speak. Um, FROM there, he says there's also toleration,
where you just put up with the other, you
don't necessarily avoid the other person, but you put
up with the situation or you just capitulate if
you're tolerating. And that's another thing between two people
that can just be done. And third, there's negotiation.
And as implied in the definition I read, you
you're trying to find some mutually acceptable agreement where
you can, you know, if you're buying something, that's
a classic example. Somebody wants a higher price, they're
selling, someone wants a lower price, they're buying, you
somehow meet in that that area. You agree, hopefully
both parties are happy, you've negotiated it out. But
in terms of conflict resolution, there's a lot of
other things to negotiate out besides just the price
of an item. So negotiation is trying to find
an agreement more generally, that's acceptable to both parties.
And then finally, we have one that's certainly not
conflict resolution. Um, Black calls it, um, oh what
does Black call it, um. Self-help, self help, and
I don't like that term, so I don't use
it because I realized in teaching that many students
thought it was about a self-help book or a
self-help program or something like this and totally getting
it wrong. So, so I prefer and I use
in the book self redress. So basically you try
to deal with this yourself in interaction with the
other person. And, and this is an area where
violence and nastiness comes in. And, and I write
about that in the book as well, just to
make sure we holistically cover what's going on in
terms of, of trying to find justice. And we'll
come back to, to the concepts of justice real
soon. I, I know. So, so those are four
areas which you could look at, like I said,
on the one hand, Here as bilateral. And then
on the other hand, Black comes up and we
have 5 fingers, fortunately, uh, with 5 different mechanisms
of what he calls third party settlement assisted, um,
conflict management. That's how's that for a mouthful? And,
and I won't go into each of those in
detail, but, you know, we have one thing that's
just, uh, friendly peacemaking. Which is merely where a
third party, a third person, or could be multiple
third persons separate and distract two people who are
having a conflict. Sometimes they keep them from physically
fighting. Sometimes they just get them to calm down
and stop their verbal tirades or whatever. But that's
called friendly peacemaking, and friendly peacemakers are really very
on equal grounds with the parties that are in
a conflict. So the next level up in terms
of having just a little bit more authority would
be a mediator who comes in. And, and Black
again says that Mediation is negotiation with the help
of third parties. So negotiation, remember, you just want
to find a mutually acceptable agreement. Here the mediator
tries to facilitate that and help out, and there's
all different variations on this, we'll get to it.
And then we have what's called arbitration. I think
we're familiar with that a lot in, in the
Western cultures, um, and it of course it exists
in other cultures as well. But the key thing
here is the third party has yet again a
little bit more authority. The third party, the arbitrator,
makes a decision. And expects that the two parties
who are being arbitrated will follow the decision. But
what's very interesting about this, and certainly in non-Western
context, is the arbitrator does not have any way
to enforce that decision. And the interesting part is
for so many cultures, people just follow it anyway.
So it's a really interesting phenomenon. You ask yourself,
well, if I'm not bound to follow it, why
would I follow it? I'll just let that be
out there as a teaser because there's various reasons
why they do. Then we come to adjudication, which,
uh, again, most of us know about, um, adjudication.
Judge Jude, um, hey Jude, the Beatles. No, OK,
that's a little aside, but I tell my students,
if you think judge is sort of embedded in
the word adjudication, then you know what you're talking
about. So the difference between a judge. Right, you
got it. The difference between a judge and an
arbitrator is the judge does have the power to
enforce, and you know, judges do that, they, they
pass down sentences and they send people to prison
and they cause, uh, people to pay fines and
so forth. That's the authority of the judge. So
I'll I'll just leave it there. The, the, the
fifth one doesn't, uh, uh, it doesn't really pertain
to. The book or to us very much um
talking here, it's just oppressive peacemaking is what he
calls it. So that umbrella view, taking largely from
the theorizing of black. I find it extremely useful
in thinking about conflict resolution anthropologically because it is
that umbrella of conflict management with all these different
bilateral and trilateral or third party assisted approaches that
really help us get the big picture. So, um,
maybe, maybe that's enough to say about anthropology and,
and the big picture definition of conflict at the
moment, but we're gonna be coming back. Um, I
also want to talk about what I call variations
on a theme, so I've sort of set that
up, um, with the.
So let me just ask you one question just
to clarify this and particularly for the audience. When
we talk about conflict resolution, it can apply to
both groups of people, and I mean just Diads
of people, right? It can be a conflict just
between two single individuals, and these sort of conflict
resolution strategies would also apply there. Or are you
focusing specifically in this case on conflicts between groups
of people?
It really can be both, and it can be
groups at various social levels as well. So this
is one of the reasons that in conflict resolution,
they very often use this vague term party and
parties because a party could be, you know, multiple
people or it could be one person. So I,
I sometimes use that terminology and, and sometimes we
can just talk about groups and, and sometimes, but
for example, if we consider mediation in a cross
cultural perspective, um. In some cases there's one mediator,
and in other cases there's a group of mediators.
For instance, imagine a group of elders in a
village, and they're informal mediators, but when there's a
problem between two people in the village, they've got
the wisdom and the experience and are respected, and
they just become the ones that try to help
work this out and find a mutual agreement. So
that's a group of mediators, and again, it could
be just two people in the dispute or it
could be multiple people in the dispute, such as
the husband. The wife, the wife's families, the husband's,
uh, parents, and so forth. So there could be
multiple parties also in this. So just a simplistic
model generally implies, you know, there's party one, party
two, and then the mediator, a little bit, you
know, yeah. And and in some cases, like in,
in some nomadic forger bands, interestingly, it's just everybody
in the camp. If they care to participate, they
will. So if, if some guy starts making comments
after dark around the fireplace about This other guy
is just looking too much at his wife or
something, and everybody in the camp hears this over
the various campfires. Then the voices start going through
the darkness trying to calm this thing down or
anybody in the camp who, and not all of
them necessarily are calming it down, but ultimately the
whole idea of the mediation at the end of
the day is, OK, we've we've talked this out,
and we've explored it and we've examined it, and
now let's go on with our lives. So that's
in that case, if it works out that way,
that's obviously successful mediation occurring in a in a
whole camp of say 20 or 30 people.
Yeah, uh, but when it's one single, when there's
one single mediator, uh, I mean, yeah, I guess
it, uh, is, it would be more or less
the same for, uh, more traditional and also more.
Um, INDUSTRIALIZED and post-industrial societies when people, for example,
resolve conflicts within their own family or within their
own community. I mean, the third party, the mediator,
usually has to be for the resolution to work
usually has to be someone who both of the
parties respect and is usually of high authority, correct.
Yes, and, and basically correct. And just a little
bit on your last part, well, let's go to,
go to your overall idea. Absolutely correct. It's called
impartiality, right? Because if, if somebody's trying to help
resolve a conflict at whatever level of authority and
they're not impartial, they are, in other words, biased
in favor of one, that, that generally speaking doesn't
work very well, you know, that their ruling is
not accepted if, if it's an optional point and
And so there's the impartiality point, I think that's
your main one, but about the authority, and again
this jumps back to Donald Black, it's very interesting.
The the just friendly peacemaking level is, it's just
who's ever there, right? It's not like there's any
real person of authority. Mediors have no real ability
to enforce anything. They're just trying to help out,
right? And then arbitrators have a bit more authority
because they do make a ruling and expect people
to follow, and the culture expects people to follow
what they are, you see where I'm going with
this, and the judges have the most authority really,
because they really can impose punishments. So authority is
an interesting word there too.
Mhm. Right. So, but how is conflict resolution studied
cross culturally? I mean, because of, uh, I don't
know, for example, linguistic variation, because of variation in
terms of how conflict resolution can manifest itself, uh,
across different socio-cultural contexts. Uh, HOW is it studied?
Yes, great, great question with that one. And um
anthropologists, as you know, traditionally would do what they
call ethnography and and live with a culture, live
in a village or or live in a region,
talk to people, observe what's going on, do participant
observation, we call it an anthropology. So much of
the way that that conflict resolution has been studied
over decades or even going back 100 years in
some cases more, is for the anthropologists. To be
there participating, make observations, and if we're lucky, they
have a particular interest in social control, um, or,
or conflict resolution or something along these lines, um,
social order, governance, and, and they write down some
case studies and they write down examples that happen
and they can be very rich. And in other
cases, uh, in anthropology, you get sort of the
bare bones description, uh, and, and some there's there's
also a bit of confusion because not everybody. Um,
FOLLOWS the definitions of what's arbitration and what's not,
and maybe just uses them offhandedly as as English
words or whatever language they're they're writing the ethnography
in. So there are some, ah, methodological issues, but
fundamentally the main source of this cross-cultural data would
be ethnographies from many different anthropologists who've gone out
across the ethnographic spectrum in different continents at different
times and recorded how people are dealing with conflict.
Now, if you can imagine this and you think
that humans are really a flexible species, which we
are, and that cultures are very different, which we
know they are, you might come to a conclusion
that there's just going to be a whole vast
array of different approaches to dealing with conflict, and
you're partly right if you come to that presumption.
Um, BUT the reason that I took some time
to go into this idea of the umbrella across
conflict management is in fact what you find is
you find recurring patterns, and, and I call them
themes across different cultural contexts. So the first major
one is, and, and I'm going to quote one
of my old professors from UCSB in California, um.
Donald Brown, he wrote a book, Human Universals, and
he concludes conflict resolution is something that people do
universally across all cultures. So that's a good start
right there, and everything that I've read about conflict
resolution in different cultures supports that conclusion as well.
So, Human dealing with conflict in some way is
a human universal, but then we come back to
this, uh, this umbrella idea, and some of these
approaches, I, I won't argue all of them, but
some of them seem to be very strong universals,
uh, or near universals. It's a little tricky to
say. Others are patterns that occur. And then there's
still other ones you can look at particular types
of societies and, and see that they occur with
regularity in those types of societies, but not necessarily
in other types of societies. So we've got a
mixed bag of, of patterns here. So, I, I
like to use, and I, I, I write about
this in the book quite a bit. It's one
of the themes of the book that runs across,
uh, the beginning to the end, and that's to
draw from music, uh, a musical metaphor. Variations on
a theme. So those people like myself who are
not really a musician, uh, and may not have
heard of this, it, it's a cool idea, and
when I explain it, I think you'll recognize what
I'm talking about. So it, it starts with a
musical motif, something rather simple or maybe a little
bit more complex, but nonetheless it's a motif. And
then as you go across the musical theme, sometimes
it speeds up and sometimes it slows down, or
maybe the motif shifts from a minor to a
major or a major to a minor. Um, AND,
and it, it's varied by instrument and sometimes as
well. So you hear the, the flute playing the
theme, and the next thing you know, the violins
are playing it, and, and so you go. So
what you end up with is the ability to
always recognize this theme, hence it is a theme
that you recognize across the musical piece. Um, BUT
with all these different variations. Musical style is changing
and so that's what I argue you see with
human conflict resolution. Let's, let's take avoidance, for example,
one of the ones under that big umbrella, a
bilateral approach, you just avoid each other. I, I
think I'm pretty sure in saying this, that in
every culture people practice avoidance. And the little caveat
is not all ethnographers bother to note it down,
but I mean, every culture that I've been in
and every person I talked about, talked, you know,
talked with in different cultures and different nations and
so forth, it's just understood that's, that's one way
you just deal with conflict is just to avoid
the other person. So you can define avoidance as
a theme, and then you can see the variations
on it. Let's jump to Inuit group. They actually
will arrange their igloos or huts in such a
way so that the doors face far away if
they're avoiding, even though they're still in the same
camp, so they can come and go without having
to see the neighbor. But if they're on good
terms, the doors might face each other and then
they can come and go and exchange words and
be friendly and and and whatnot. So there's a
zillion different ways cross-culturally that the avoidance plays out,
but basic simple ways you just try to avoid
contact and interaction with the person who you're in
a conflict with. So that that illustrates it as
well. Um, I, I think another example, maybe we'll
get to this in a little bit, talk about
apology that sort of makes the, the same point
of the variations on a theme, idea. Um, SO
how is it studied culturally? As I just said,
the main way that conflict resolution and conflict management
has been studied is individual ethnographers going out, recording
what's going on. So that's the type of data
which I draw on extensively. There's lots of articles.
There's a few books. I mean, here's one example
of A book that I edited with my colleague
Graham Kim. And what we asked the contributors to
this edited volume to particularly deal with is how
is conflict managed in the society that they've worked
in. So that was sort of unique to try
to get everybody in the book. I think there's
8 ethnographic chapters in there, including Norway as an
ethnographic. CASE, but most of them are, are, uh,
less complicated in a social organization than, than a
modern nation state. But in any case, to, to
examine how do these people view conflict, how do
they deal with it? How are they managing conflict,
and provide as many examples as you can. So
that, that's, you know, one case here, a book
I happen to be involved with, um, that illustrates
the different types of studies. And then occasionally, not
really too often in the literature, but there's some
cases where there's a comparison between different groups. Sometimes
it might be a comparison of different methods within
the same society. That's always interesting. A really neat
example of this is from colleague Polly Wiesner and
New Guinean indigenous person Pupu, and Wiesner and Pupu
did a study where they looked at the traditional
courts within. Meenga society and then they compared them
with the government of New Zealand. The government imposed
district courts, and what they found out first of
all ethnographically is that the Meenga. Use compensation a
great deal for settlements of disputes, and often mediation
is involved with the the the compensation pattern. Meanwhile,
the government comes in and wants to do things
like impose fines and prison sentences. And so this
got very different results. The case has gone to
the government, about 10% of them, if I recall,
people had to pay fines and they were not
real happy with that. In other cases, the, the
one dispute and just uh you know, one person
suing the other, bringing the case just gave up
and disgust and and it didn't get resolved, and
other cases were thrown out by the. Um, VARIOUS
legal judges from, from the government, not understanding that
this was, uh, I shouldn't say not understanding, but
I just they were, they were thrown out on
technicalities or whatever. So the vast majority of these
cases never really got heard or resolved in any
way. Meanwhile, back at the traditional courts where the
judge acted more like a mediator than a judge,
um, They worked with the people, told one party
that you needed to compensate this amount. That was
understood. OK, I'll I'll pay 5 pigs for my
misdeed. Paid the 5 pigs and all was good.
So they found really different results. They had around
40 cases from each court. They, they compared them
and came up with a number. So that's another
approach you can use in doing conflict resolution studies.
And finally, there's, there's not too many cases like
I mentioned of this, but sometimes anthropologists team up.
And for instance, there's, there's an article in the
literature where they look at, I think it's 3
different societies, maybe it's even. Sologists had gone out
and collected their data, and then they discussed them
and compare them and see what are the the
the similarities and the differences. So in a way.
Um, HERE'S, here, let me, um, I, I have
a few books here. I wanna plug this one
certainly as well. This is from 2016, and it's,
it's filled with ethnographic cases about how indigenous peoples
deal with conflicts. It's a, it's a wonderful book,
and it also comes with a nice theoretical introduction.
And conclusion in there as well. One of the,
one of the editors is, is indigenous, um, so
that helps too, and he's got a lot of
interesting insights. So there are these types of studies,
I guess maybe that answers your question, I hope
about the methods and where the data is coming
from.
Yes, uh, uh, let me just ask you, because
I mean, I'm going to take, uh, I hope,
uh, a short detour here, but, uh, I, I
really want to ask you because since you mentioned
Doctor Donald Brown and his book Human Universals, I
think this is, uh, an important question for me
to ask an anthropologist like. You, uh, because, uh,
I've talked about human universal several times on the
show, and I, I guess this would even be
a very important segment of the interview if people
watch our previous ones for them to come here
and learn a little bit more about this because,
I mean, I read Dr. Brown's book. It's a
fascinating one from the early 1990s and Um, uh,
uh, let, let me ask you this. When it
comes to human universals, if we find that something,
a particular kind of behavior, for example, is a
human universal or a near universal, uh, does it
imply necessarily that it is an evolved trait or
That it has some sort of biological underpinnings to
it. I'm asking you that because people like evolutionary
psychologists, for example, many times make use of literature
on human universals to make the case that all
universals every Everything that we find to be a
human universal is necessarily an evolved trait or part
of our biology in some way that it has
an evolutionary basis to it. I remember even, for
example, in his book, um, from the early 2000s,
Steven Pinker has a book, uh, about. No, it's
not how the mind works. It's the other one,
I think from 2002. I, I'm not remembering the
correct title here, but It's something about human nature
and even at the, at the very end of
the book puts there the entire list of human
universals that Donald Brown explores in his book from
the 90s and to make the claim that all
of those universals are then. A biological in nature
or evolved adaptations if you want to use evolutionary
biology, language, I guess. So, but, but is that
necessarily the case that if something is a human
universal that it must be biological in some way.
Well, I think you've gone to a really important
issue, and of course I know many of your
listeners are going to be interested in exactly this
topic, and I have several thoughts. So the first
thought is when you're talking about behavior, you know,
it's, it's always going to be a mix of
different influences. We used to say that the genotype
plus environment ends up with your phenotype as a
rough model, and then nicely the whole development developmental
sequence, which is very complicated and Interactive comes into
play. So I think we always need to keep
that in mind that behaviors are not generally speaking,
so, so rigidly programmed in humans. Um, BUT there's
always environmental influences, so I'm not trying to dodge
your question, but I think that's an important caveat
to just sort of put there in the background
as we're talking about this. The, the second thought
that I have is we probably should be more
careful than just immediately say it's biological, and if
it's biological, it's an adaptation. Uh, THAT doesn't sit
right with me for several reasons. And, and, you
know, interestingly, Donald Brown is coming out of UCSB,
as I mentioned, he was a longtime professor there,
as was Donald Simons. And I was fortunate enough
to take a class, one class with both of
them and several classes, uh, you know, with Simons.
So, um, they actually made a bet, you might
remember this little detail because it's a little bit
of human curiosity, where they were talking and, and
Simons is the, uh, what we call now an
evolutionary psychologist, although that term didn't exist when when
I was there and taking classes from him. He,
he was writing his book on human sexuality. And
pointing out that things like males tend to seek
more sexual variety than women, and there's a reason
for that, blah blah. And, and Donald Brown, a
true bred and, and taught cultural anthropologist, it was
wonderful to hear them debate and argue in this,
this seminar class we had together with the two,
Don and Don. But in any case, he, he
writes this in the beginning of his book, in
the foreword, I think it is, about he and,
and Simon's made a bet. And then he confesses
that he lost the bet, and that there were
all these human universals, and hence here's this book
on human universals, which he's, uh, he's surprised. And
I always love it when people are able to
change their mind. It just gives me hope in
humanity and help in the scientists that can change
their minds when presented with new evidence and, and
new data. So I'm just sharing, you know, I,
I was just a student, and this is long
ago, but I, I was there, the fly on
the wall for some of this way. Back. And
another thing that that Simon's really emphasized to his
students was that you should really look at the
design, the evolutionary function and the design of a
trait before you just attribute it to being so
biological or being an evolved trait. So that is
my second real point here with fortune when you
just take a list. And all of that said,
um, I, I think that that overall that idea
is, is good, that if you see something that
is what we could also call species typical, species
typical behavior, which is sort of a different way
of getting at universals, but It's something that most
members of the species are going to show, maybe
all members of the species are going to show,
under the environment under which is typical for them.
Again, so the environment comes in with this concept
more explicitly than does just using the term universals.
Mhm. I think there's a lot of evidence that
dealing with aggression in ways that's nonviolent is certainly
part of our evolutionary heritage, and I think this
book on conflict resolution is really poking the question,
you know, building on Donald Brown's book that conflict
resolution is, is something that is a human universal.
So I, I don't find any culture that doesn't
have some various forms of conflict resolution, conflict management.
As to how they deal with things. And one
of the conclusions you, you know, you read in
this, it's a short book, it's an easy read,
um, you'll get out of this one is that
Try to avoid the worst consequences of a conflict,
and what they do strive to do universally, it
seems, uh, well, no, I don't want to say
universally for this one, but the overall pattern ethnographically,
non-Western, indigenous, um, not necessarily in the United States.
United States, my own culture might be the one
that breaks the universality. But generally speaking, It's a
big conclusion. Restore damaged relationships, reconcile the parties who
are in a dispute. That seems to be the
overwhelming reason why people engage in conflict resolution. And
I think that's huge. Again, I'm the guy that's
written in the past, you know, human potential for
peace. And, and I've argued that we have a
huge potential for peace, and conflict resolution is, uh,
you know, one of my longstanding interests, but this
book sort of pulls it together, and I try
to make this case in, in the book that
this is what humans do. And of course, thinking
in terms of adaptation and and the Why we
might consider resolving conflicts to be a human adaptation,
um, there are certain reasons why this is a
good thing, um. I, I think I wrote down
here in my notes that I want to talk
about um costs of conflict. If we just, if
we come back to the idea of what is
good for us and what's not good for us,
if we're living in a social group and we're
all interdependent on each other or we're interdependent on
some people, it's going to be beneficial to get
along well with them, and conflict through avoidance and
other bad feelings and so forth can really mess
up the relationships in so many different ways and
have other negative effects. So just for example, conflict
eats up time. Devours money, consumes attention better spent
on other pursuits. This is certainly true in any
society we're talking about. Conflict can destroy relationships, and
keep in mind again, this seems to be the
recurring theme that you want to restore those relationships
and and reconcile the people in a conflict. So
conflict damages or can destroy relationships. It can shred
your reputation as a reasonable person if you just
are involved in too many conflicts and never give.
Um, MANGLED support networks, conflict can leave quite a
mess to clean up. And let's not forget the
emotions, anger, pain, anxiety, distress, frustration, annoyance, embarrassment, guilt,
doubt, fear, and, and so forth. So there's certainly
studies emerging now across different fields as to how
we feel that conflict, being in a long term
conflict can even affect things like blood pressure and
other physiological responses. You know, this is not my
expert area to Talk about, but I'm just intrigued,
and it's something that as a human being, if
I'm species typical, I certainly have trouble physiologically with
a, with a conflict. So I, I, I try
to play with this a little bit in the
book as well as something that occurs cross-culturally, not
just in, in our societies. And there's there's information
out there here and there ethnographically. For instance, a
study in Fiji points out that this Fijian man
expressed such gratitude when the conflict was over that
he can now feel normally and not be so
worried about this. And Zun Twasi people from the
Kalahari, uh, when there's been a conflict in their
group, they often perform the special ritual of a
trance dance to remove the ill feelings and be
in contact with, with the spirits and get things
back to normal. So this suggests, doesn't it, that
the conflict is upsetting. In these contexts, uh, not
just Western contexts where we're taking our blood pressure
and so on, and I'm, I'm sure virtually anybody
listening has spent sleepless hours lying in their bed
or strolling around, uh, looking out the window because
of a dispute at work or with a family
member. Um, RIGHT, you've been there. Sounds like you've
been there, you're nodding your head. Yeah. So, so
we take this for granted. But if you think
about back to your question, right, if we think
about universals. This is part of the conflict and
conflict resolution pattern. There's something there trying to motivate
us to deal with this. It's the flashing light.
Oh, you've got a problem. You've got a conflict,
and you need to deal with this somehow, whether
it's just simply to walk away and avoid, or
whether it's to try to negotiate it out yourself,
or it's whether to just tolerate you, it's not,
it's going to go nowhere, so I just have
to put up with it, but still you're feeling
all this angst and negativity. Or do you take
it to the authorities? Do, do you sue the
person? Do you just, you know, act out of
violence and and aggression, self-redress, and decide you're going
to do something about it violently yourself, you know,
I'll get the bastard, and that's not conflict resolution
in my thinking, but that does pertain to justice.
It does pertain to trying to solve the problem.
Again, we can explore this a little bit more.
So, in, in sum, and you, I realized you
raised a very interesting side point here, right? That
we do need to be cautious. Ideally, we would
not just look at universal features, we'd also look
at the developmental sequence. We'd also try to explore
different elements of this, such as the emotions and
the, the, the neurophysiology and, and hormones and, you
know, look at it holistically as to get as
much data as we can about what is causing
this, if, if that's appropriate or relevant. And um
then we'd also be looking in terms of, well,
how does this function and and think evolutionarily. What,
what would be the explanation for why we have
this human universal and, you know, it, it's not
just human, by the way, this is also a
critical point. Uh, I, I want to definitely mention
someone that everybody has heard of, uh, Frans de
Waal. And of course,
I, I, I have the pleasure of interviewing him
twice on the show, so
that's fantastic, yes. He was a very nice guy
as well as an innovative thinker, and of course,
so he's he's dealt in this edited volume with
conflict resolution across primates and in humans and so
forth and Here's just one, you know, we've heard
about the first kiss. Here's a visual presentation of
the two chimpanzees. Who have had their conflict and
they separate a little bit of avoidance, but it
doesn't last long, and it ends by the, the
person, one chimpanzee person kissing the other one as
a reconciliation. So what what Frans de Waal, with
his landmark thinking, he, he drew attention to aggression
is not just aggression, and, and that's the end
of it. It very often across now numerous species,
it's been documented that there's this inclination to reconcile.
And one of the main reasons that he and
his colleagues, other researchers have pointed out for this
is the importance of the relationship, right? The valuable
relationship hypothesis. And I think that This is very
much the case for humans as well, that we
are a very social species, we all need different
members of our own species to get by, literally
to survive, and this has been going on through
our evolutionary history. So we can, we can link
this in again, back to your question as universals
and adaptations and so forth. The valuable relationship hypothesis
is, is one explanation as to why we would
have evolved a pattern for conflict resolution. Mhm.
Right. I, I mean, just for, uh, to give
people the correct reference because I mean, I was
trying to mention the Steven Pinker bookie. I, I
was referring to the blank slate, the modern denial
of human nature. That's the one where he includes
the list of human universals toward the end of
the book, but, uh, anyway, let's
say you drew a blank about the title. Yeah
I guess so.
So, uh, anyway, uh, let, let me ask you,
um, one more question about conflict resolution. I mean,
do the kinds of conflict resolution that people adopt
vary cross-culturally? I mean, is it that in some
socio-cultural contexts, we tend to find, uh, Some kinds
of conflict resolution that are more prevalent than others
and in other social cultural contexts, I mean other
kinds would be more prevalent and if so, do
we have any idea about the kinds of factors
that would play a role there? I mean, would
there be any Uh, ecological factors, and cultural factors
that influence, uh, the prevalence, uh, the prevalence of
different kinds of conflict resolution across human societies.
Yes, and, and I'm just going to start by
saying I think that would be an excellent series
of questions for students, scientists, PhD students, for instance,
to actually go out and and try to get
some data on that and figure this out. Because
at least to my reading of the field, we
just really don't know too much as to why
there would be differences from different societies. So of
course 11 explanation is it's just sort of historical
particularism and they, they sort of went that way,
random genetic drift, you know, not literally random genetic
drift, but cultural drift. Um, WHAT I will say
I've noticed is that there are some cultures that
just favor avoidance, for instance, they're very avoidance positive,
and that means they're dealing with conflicts without actually
engaging in active resolution of them. And, and this
may be good and this may be bad depending
on your point of view and depending on what
happens. So if you go years or decades and
the conflict is still seething and both of you
are still avoiding each other. Not, not so great.
And I mean, I, I tell an instance from
my, my own family where mother and son did
not talk to each other for 20 some years,
and that's a real tragedy. And, and finally they
did get back together and things were still tense.
But all that lost time between a mother and
a and a Um, due to conflict. So that's
avoidance in one form, but like I say, there
are, there are cultures that really favor this, and
interestingly, Southeast Asia, uh, maybe Asia in general tends
to have a lot of these types of, of
cultures as a regional focus. I don't think that's
ecological, but it might be have something to do
with culture area and diffusion of. Ideas and, and
it's again, research questions. I, I really don't know
about that. What I've also noticed from looking cross-culturally
is that it's, there's not many of these, but
there's some number of cultures who really focus on
self-redress and leaving the individual up to their own
devices to try to deal with their, their conflict.
And in the best case, this would involve negotiating.
Um, RIGHT, that's a bilateral process. It's something you
initiate, so that's, that's a type of, um, Well,
I should say self-initiated, not, not necessarily self-redress in
the negative sense, but the other is the negative
where you actually engage in in violence and so
forth. And I, I, I wanna read this one.
So this is from work in the 1960s by
a Swiss anthropologist named Broger, and what Broger describes
is Uh, there was a row of trees along
the property line of these two farmer peasants, Giuseppe
and Domenico. Uh, Broger writes, Domenico cut down some
of the trees and made charcoal. Viewing the trees
as a shared resource, Giuseppe requested of Domenico some
of the charcoal, but Domenico refused to share. They
argued, and in a rage, Giuseppe retaliated by stealing
some rabbits belonging to Domenico. Seeking retribution, Domenico cut
down some of Giuseppe's vineyard in the middle of
the night. Further enraged, Giuseppe killed Domenico, so. That's
also, uh, you know, bilateral self-redress of the violent
type. And again, some cultures, I, I don't know
if this particular culture leaned in this direction or
if it's an incident that Broger shared with us
that unfortunately occurred, but there are some cultures where
the main emphasis is you have to just take
care of this yourself. And again, I, I, my
impression is I don't have numbers because of the
state of the data in the field, but my
impression is this is not very typical, but it,
it does exist in some cultures. Much more typically
is, is what we would call the involvement of
the third side, and I think it was an
anthropologist. Uh, William Uri, who, who first coined this
term of the third side and wrote a book
about it, um, a couple of decades back, but
this, uh, this recent book that I, I held
up and, and showed you just a minute ago,
creating the third force, that's playing off of this
idea that that third parties get involved and looping
back to what you'd raised before, it's interesting how
third parties have an inclination to get involved. In
many cultures to help dispute and work this out.
So again, we can think about the ripple effect
for a very social species where people need each
other and there's a lot of interdependencies in the
relationships. Conflict between two can upset conflict among many
if it's just allowed to get out of, out
of hand, and many of the anthropologists who have
described conflict and the involvement of these third parties.
Make this different this this point in various different
cultural ways that they, they understand the ramifications of
a conflict in their small group or their village
or whatever, and that it could go really badly.
So they're very much involved in more cultures than
not. Hence again, this idea of just a self-redress
pattern is rather minimal, but it's a really interesting
question, you know, again that you're raising as to
why would some cultures do it this way and
most cultures not. And my final response to this
one is, yes, you can also tell a few
things. The obvious influence of social organization is on
adjudication, because recall, if you have a judge, the
judge has the power to enforce, and if you
have a very egalitarian type of social organization, the
judge doesn't have, there's no one that has the
power to enforce anything. So what you really need
is the development of a chiefdom, a strong chiefdom
or a state, and then adjudication as defined, you
know, by black and as we're using it here,
has, has a role to play. So there's a
really interesting example I talked about towards, towards the
end of the book where the ethnographer, I believe
it was in the 1940s, working in Africa, actually
observed a shift from allowing revenge killings to Take
place between lineages, and that was just the way
things were functioning to exerting more authority than had
existed previously in in that society and saying, OK,
from now on, I prohibit the lineages fighting and
killing each other as a form of self redress.
Now you're going to bring your disputes to me
and my assembly, and we will determine. Who's to
pay whom and whatever, and there's not going to
be loss of life over this. That's a very
interesting example from the Otara Nba, um, written by
an anthropologist, Nadel, who happened to be at the
right place in the right time and and saw
this interesting cultural change, cultural shift, or in other
words, the the birth of an adjudication process. Uh,
BY the chief. So I, I just love examples
like that, you know, that sometimes fall into our
laps, you know, fall into our theories. Otherwise you're
left speculating, you're left looking, well, look, here's 7
chiefdoms and there's different types of adjudication, and there's
an authority and the judge can make a ruling
and enforce it. OK, that makes sense. And, and
here's hunter-gatherers and you can look far and wide
and you don't find any. Adjudication because nobody has
the power to enforce and you, you, you know,
you put it together that way. So like I
say, when you actually get a, a case where
the transition occurred and some social change occurred and
the anthropologist wrote it down, it's, it's pretty exciting.
Right. No, it's definitely very interesting and, uh, I,
I guess useful. Uh, uh, THAT'S something I'm going
to ask you toward the end of our conversation,
how, I mean, by studying conflict resolution across different
societies and particularly non-Western. Societies, I mean, what we
can learn from it and whether this can be
applied to our more larger scale modern industrialized societies,
but that's something we're going to come back to
toward the end. Let me ask you now more
about The several themes of conflict resolution that you
explore in your book, starting with reciprocity. I mean,
what is reciprocity? What forms can it take and
what role does it play in conflict resolution?
Yes, thanks, thanks for that question. I have a
whole chapter. It's chapter 2 on reciprocity, and I
put this chapter early in the book because it
is such an important concept. And what is, I
would say, not strictly innovative but pretty cutting edge
is to try to explore this combination of the
reciprocity idea and conflict management, conflict reso. Um, A
lot of people have highlighted reciprocity in different ways,
and from different perspectives, and just let me run
through this briefly because I think it's, it's pretty
cool. So, so Frans de Waal again, he relates
in one of his books, um, when Confucius was
asked what is the most important lesson about how
to run your life and live your your life.
He thought because he was Confucius, right, didn't answer
right away. He gave it some thought and he
said reciprocity. Just one word, reciprocity. And of course,
Charles Darwin interestingly um came along and also emphasized
the importance of reciprocity as the foundation stone of
morality. Nation start royality and basically paraphrases what's in
the Bible in terms of being, again a a
human universal principle, so says Darwin, as to how
uh people conduct their social lives. So wow. Um,
I, I spent quite a bit of time in
Finland as we were chatting about informally, and while
I was in Finland, my sociological trained colleagues and
friends brought to my attention, uh, Edward Vestermark, and
I'd heard of Edward Edward Vestermark only in terms
of the Vestermark effect and so forth, but what
I didn't know about Vestermark was how he had
come up with a view of emotions and how
reciprocity relates to emotions. And this is a largely
neglected point. I, I try to mention it whenever
I have an audience, so here I am mentioning
it. Uh, Vestermark understood that when someone does you
a good deed, you feel emotion, you feel gratitude,
and you feel the need to repay. Wow, that's
cool, isn't it? And we all know this, at
least most of us know this. And then the
other side of it is if someone does you
a bad turn, well, same principle, right? You sort
of want to get even payback, etc. ETC. AND
this occurs across various statements of the golden rule
in different major religions, um, you know, it's, it's
in. In Judaism, for instance, with the elder Hillel
making a comment to a novice who would like
to to learn more about Jewish religion that, well,
um, Do unto others as you want them to
do unto you. That's basically it. The rest is
window dressing. I'm paraphrasing the exact quote's in the
book somewhere. Um, BUT, you know, look at, uh,
Hinduism and Buddhism and, and Muslim Islam, and they're
all different variations of Either do unto others as
you would wish them to do, and often it's,
it's turned the other way around and says don't
do to others as you would not want them
to do to you. Either way, it's the, the
phrasing of the reciprocity rule and the golden rule,
and indigenous cultures, many of them, um, where it's
recorded, have exactly. Statements to the same effect, um,
I, I, I would say unfortunately they're not always
recorded, which doesn't mean they don't exist, but it
simply means that nobody thought to write them down,
or I didn't find it when I'm doing my
research or so I'm a combination of the above.
But for, for instance, on Ifaluk Island in the
Pacific. Katherine Lutz tells a story that illustrates exactly
this, pointing out that there's even the concept in
that society of the payback. So one woman is
giving birth, she invites her her friends and relatives
to be part of the birth, and she leaves
somebody out. And Katherine Lutz explains how then months
later or a year later or whatever, when the
woman who was left out is now giving birth,
she doesn't invite the other one as the equitable
payback for not having been invited. So if you
think about this, as most people will get this
immediately, my, my point here is if we're talking
human universals again, wow, reciprocity is really huge. And
the second point is, well, how does this relate
to conflict resolution? I, I want to really give
a call out to conflict resolver Furlong, Gary Furlong,
who has written a book about conflict resolution Toolbox,
and he was kind enough to give a blurb
for the book, so we had a positive interaction
there for the first time. But I, I really
appreciated in his second edition of his conflict resolution
toolbox, how he actually put in reciprocity explicitly, because
I, I've not seen this in any. Of the
conflict resolution literature that I'm familiar with and have
reviewed for the book. So I, I, I took
his idea and applied it in cross cultural circumstance.
He, he gave some examples from Western context, but
it's, it's really important. He, he points out that
you can have the, the positive spiral or the
negative spiral, and what you want to do for
conflict resolution is by all means avoid going in
the negative downward. Spiral of reciprocity. I do you
have that. We just, we just saw it actually
perfectly with these two Italian peasants and and their
story. They got into this downward spiral and it
ended up in one committing homicide and killing the
other. That's about as bad as you can get
as an outcome for a conflict. But there's also
the positive, and there's also the important point with
conflict resolution is if it starts to spiral downward,
oh, put on the brakes and spiral it back
up positively. So one example of this which has
absolutely important implications today, I'll just slip this into
partial answer to your other question you mentioned about
implications, is is to look at international relations, and
there was a really interesting book written in 1962
by a psychologist about grit, G R I T,
graduated reciprocal reductions in. No, graduated, yeah, in tension
reduction, tension reduction hyphenated, so you get grit, and
he, he, he, Osgood is his name. Osgood pointed
out how basically you can reverse an arms race,
this time 62, between the United States and the
USSO by taking a series of reciprocated steps, and
he gives a wonderful analogy that illustrates the danger
of the Cold War nuclear arms race and the
threat of nuclear annihilation of all humanity or all
life on the planet for that matter, by saying
we have a teeter-totter. Basically a long board balanced
here and just let's imagine it's above a bottomless
abyss, just to make it more interesting, and we've
got a President of the United States and President
of the USSR and with each negative. Occasion reciprocal
downward spiral, they're stepping further out on this unstable
teeter totter, he says, with graduated reciprocal initiatives for
tension reduction, one of them proclaims, I'm taking a
step towards you. And does something concrete, announcing it
ahead of time, and I'm doing it to warm
our relationships. I'm doing it for peace. And in
this way, if it's reciprocated, well, it has to
be to keep the balance, but then the other
side might take a step and it needs to
be reciprocated. Pretty soon they're back hugging each other.
All is good. OK, maybe not quite all is
good, but it's a very well thought out book
on this topic, and It has absolute implications for
some of the conflicts going on in the world.
I mean, as, as we're having this conversation, right,
we we've got the United States and Israel bombing
Iran and Iran shooting back, and it's a downward
spiral of mutual exchanging of bombs and killing people.
Just the latest example of this, right? Russia, Ukraine,
and any other circumstance. It's no way to run
a planet, to quote Lester Brown. But in any
case, if we try to learn something from a
reciprocity and conflict resolution, there are ways to reduce
and prevent this downward spiral and in fact reverse
it and come back out. So this is what
Gary Furlong talks about in a in a more
domestic Western setting in which I thought this is,
this is brilliant and so important and so applicable
that I also try to talk about in a
more general, um, let's apply this cross culturally. Now
my, my interpretation here is yet we have another
human universal, and I think if you go back
to Don Brown's book, you'll also see the word
reciprocity on his list as well. So it's like
no big, big surprise here. Robert Trivers, of course,
wrote about reciprocal altruism. It's a special form of
reciprocity. Robert Axelrod has written his wonderful book about
evolution of cooperation. And there's this chapter in there,
which you may be familiar about, is what occurred
amongst the troops in the trenches of World War
One. And they engaged in what could be considered
reciprocal restraint. Not so much has been written about
that, but it's, it's a key concept. I won't
kill you if you won't kill me. I won't
shoot at you if you won't shoot at me.
And they developed all sorts of patterns and rules
to this. If, if they were allowed to be
facing each other for a while. And in fact,
as new troops would come in and the existing
troops would rotate out, they would even explain to
the incoming troops, here are the rules, guys, no
shooting at the enemy before 9 a.m. you know,
8 to 9 is. Truth time, we're all doing
our morning stuff, you know, etc. ETC. So, um,
There's lots of applications of reciprocity to dealing with
conflicts, to preventing conflicts. What, what I counsel towards
the end of the book, at the end of
the book, I provide some, you know, takeaways, if
you will, that any person might want to apply
in their own lives. One of them is at
all costs avoid the downward spiral of reciprocity. And
if you find yourself in one, start going the
other way as fast as you can, you know,
so. You know, a couple of concrete lessons from
this research, from this book.
So, uh, yeah, I, I think that we've already
touched on this aspect in, uh, at least one
of our earlier interviews when we talked about how
people maintain peace between different societies. Uh, TELL us
about the importance of relationships and interconnections when it
comes to conflict resolution.
Yeah, I think, um, in, in a way, I
thank you for the question to, to elaborate a
little bit. So I also have a chapter on
on relationships and Again, it makes the point that
in any human society people are really interconnected and
dependent upon each other for a variety of things,
you know, whether, whether we're just talking within the
family and the raising of the kids or more
generally within the community and the sharing of goods.
I mean, one point I make there in the
chapter that talks a lot about the nomadic foragers
is that every single example of every single ethnography
of nomadic foragers talks about them sharing meat. That's,
that's, I don't know if that one's in, in
Don Brown's book because it's a special type of
society, but it just shows how important it is,
in our, in our past to share food resources,
especially protein rich and, and, and fatty meat, that
every society that I've found any ethnography, and I've
looked at a lot of ethnographies, right? It's just
one of those patterns that recurs and recurs in
this type of society of hunter gatherers or of
nomadic foragers, so. That's important to relationships, and relationships
um again link back to this idea from De
Waal's work in the non-human primates, of valuable relationships,
some are more valuable than others, and we make
that decision. Sometimes we just choose that we're not
going to engage with the person anymore. That's easier
for us to do in large scale modern societies
where there's a lot of people. It can be
very much more difficult, even impossible, to do in
small scale societies, whether we're talking nomadic foragers, a
type of very long evolutionary past social organization which
the species evolved in, or whether we're talking about
more recent but still small scale societies. So in
one chapter, and I'm jumping around just a little
bit, but I think it makes sense in this
case, I talk about reconciliation, forgiveness, and reconciliation rituals,
and we consider 4 different types, 4 different cases
I should say, from Hawaii and the Hoponobono, Omaha
and how Omaha used to make peace after they'd
been at war. Um, THERE'S another interesting case from
Sama De Laut, nomadic boat people from Southeast Asia,
and that they have actually a, a term for
when people are not speaking with each other, that
type of avoidance. And then they have an entire
ritual that the third parties, the other members of
the community have to be involved in to to
pull this off and make this work, and it
involves all sorts of different elements of of ritual
as, as they do, hence we're calling them reconciliation
rituals. To reconcile the parties again, major motivation of
conflict resolution reconcile the parties. And another one is
to restore group harmony or normal relationships within the
group. So relationships are yet another factor, just put
it this way, that are integrally involved in looking
at conflict resolution. And you can, you know, look
at this from many different perspectives. A Western model,
which I think has utility, and I talk about
this briefly in the book as well, is called
the dual concern model, and it has to do
with, you know, say you and I are the
two people involved in this case. How much do
I care about your outcome and how much do
I not care about your outcome? How much do
I care about my outcome and how much do
I don't. So we basically can create a 2
by 2 cell. There are 4 cells as to
what happens. And if I care a lot about
you and I care a lot about me, well,
we tend to engage in problem solving and and
work it out. Well, let's call it negotiation, for
instance, or in some way finding an integrated solution.
We, we try to work on that because I
value your outcome as well as my own. But
if I'm call me. Selfish bastard. I just really
don't care about you, Ricardo. I'm sorry. I just
want my way. Well, then I'm going to just
use coercion and I don't really care about your
feelings, your outcome, anything else. So we can map
this out and end up with 4 different strategies
as to approach from from problem solving to, um,
Coercion and and self redress to avoidance, and then
simply toleration. So I know this is not making
any sense with me waving my hands around, but
uh the book has a nice table that explains
it, and if you want me to, I'll try
to give it a better shot at explaining it
here.
No, that, that's fine, uh, of course, this is
also to promote your book so people can certainly
go and look at the, that figure in your
book there. So, um, but how important, uh, to
get into another topic related to conflict resolution, how
important is it to respect the rights of others?
And, and I mean, I, I was, I was
also curious, uh, when it comes to these topics
specifically because Uh, are you, as an anthropologist, uh,
how are you using the word right or rights
here, because of course it has a form of,
it, it has a legal definition, then it also
has a, I guess a philosophical definition, but uh
I, I mean, is that something that also applies
the concept of right or that we can see
a form of it mani manifested in, uh, non-Western
societies.
Yes, and And this is, this is a more
like you say, a philosophical discussion, um. I'm not
a philosopher, so why am I doing this, right?
The, the way I see it is, um, stemming
from the work of anthropologist Laura Nader, where she
talked about to make the balance. I think that
this idea of, of making the balance. Is very,
very central to justice, as again something that we
can see as as general terms or principles to
manifest across the ethnographic spectrum across humanity, and perhaps
to some of the non-human primates as well. So
there's this really gone viral, um, short video of
one of Frans de Waal's former students, now professor
well into her own right, Sarah Brosnan. So Brosnan
and Dualal some decades ago.
I, I've, I, I've interviewed her as well.
Yeah, oh great. So just a reminder, right, she's
looked at fairness. Um, THIS video is great because
it's called Monkeys will not work for unequal, will
not work equally for unequal pay, right? So it
involves giving a more desired payment of a rate
to one monkey and a cucumber, less desirable to
the other, and how annoyed the monkey getting the
cucumber goes. So, You know, there may be, not
necessarily a sense of, of equity among the monkeys,
but at least they want to get a fair
deal for themselves. And I say not a sense
of equity, I mean a sense of social equity
that everybody should get equal pay or something. Um,
I don't think she thinks that that applies to
the monkeys, but it certainly can apply to humans.
Um, SO this idea of rights, uh, equity, equality
and fairness. To me they're linked up with this
idea of justice and making the balance and I
don't have in this discussion, you know, like hard
evidence and lots of evidence for this. That could
be a whole another book. It would be interesting
to really dig into it much more deeply, but
what I do notice is that if you look
at the conflict resolution across these different cultures, there's
this principle of fairness and equity just keep recurring
as a way out of the problem. And perhaps
this is a fine point just to mention that,
you know, the, the What do you call it,
the um Syllable, the the the RE in front,
what is that? Uh, IT'S Now this is escaping
me now. I'm drawing the blank about this one,
but RE in Latin, the two letters R means
to go back or go back again or to
return. And just for fun, it occurred to me
that I could give each title in the book
an RE word, and it actually made a lot
of sense because what it's suggesting is whether we're
talking about um. Reciprocity, that's an RE word, and
literally that one means back and forward again, you
know, back again and forward, back and forth, just
put it that way, catching that idea of reciprocity.
Well, resolution as in conflict resolution, if you go
back for the solution part, it actually meant in
Latin originally to loosen something up. And now it
sort of morphed a bit, you know, to, to
fix something up, right, but to loosen. So again
with the re in front of it, it's, it's
something got too tight. You've got to loosen it
up as a resolution. So if a conflict, is
there a conflict resolution, so. Equity and rights and
justice and to make the balance are concepts about
resolution and and they interrelate with each other. So
I encourage people just to think more about this
because it's it's really pretty fascinating as to What
it also says about our, our human inclinations. Yeah,
maybe I'll just stop that one there at, at
that point, you know, I, I explore this a
bit more, but again, in this particular case, more
philosophically, um, I do try to link it to
conflict resolution in the book. Mhm.
Uh, HOW about reconciliation? I mean, because, of course,
uh, rituals of apology and forgiveness can also play
a role across human society. So, uh, how do
people reconcile and how do these rituals of apology
and forgiveness look like?
So I've Compiled a list. I actually have been
thinking about this and working on it for quite
a while as I read ethnographies, and by quite
a while already in this natural conflict resolution book
that Dal and Uli did published in 2000, I
wrote a chapter for that and discussed some of
the common elements of reconciliation. So here again we
come back to this idea of There are themes,
and in this sense we're not only considering reconciliation
as a theme, but we're also looking at micro
themes, you could put it that way, or sub-thees,
and, and, and just listen, I, I'll just read
this because that's as good a way as any.
Um, SO a comparison of reconciliations cross culturally reveals
various recurring subthees, for instance, giving and exchanging gifts.
There's reciprocity in a positive sense, interestingly. Paying compensation
or making other forms of restitution. We haven't talked
about compensation yet, but we can get there. Sharing
of food and drink. And what's really interesting there
is think about what we humans just normally do.
If it's normal, if things are in a in
a good social way, we're all the time sharing
food and drink, we have a conflict, very often
with the reconciliation. This is exaggerated, and now we're
back to sharing food and drink again. So it's
sort of falling into place, I think. Making positive
physical contact such as hugging, you know, I just
even mentioned the chimpanzees kissing. Well, we, we do
that too. And of course a fun element of
this, everybody wants to hear more about makeup sex,
right? So I slipped an example or two of
that in there, uh, into the mix. So physical
contact, um, showing gestures of of or postures that
signal appeasement. Non-threatening postures, for instance, in some cases
it's literally lowering the body, and this could be
looked at very ecological, um, ec sorry, ecologically as,
as well when you look at animal conflict and
submission signals and so forth. OK, um, expressing contrition,
remorse, or apology is another recurring element to this,
where apology is, is one party. Understanding that they
had done another one wrong, acknowledging that and saying
they're sorry, that's sort of the general definition. But
again, this is an interesting theme where it plays
out culturally in so many different ways. So for
instance, I gave an example of Rotuma Island. An
apology involves the cooking of a pig in a
very special way under the sand or under the
earth, and then bringing the pig as a sign
of apology and then expressing the apology or else
having a high status person come along and do
it as even more weight to the apology, but
presenting the pig, which has a particular name and
in this sense symbolizes the apology is legitimate and
important, and here's this valuable. Uh, FOOD to go
with it. So, so clearly that's rotin, you know,
you've never done that. I've never done that. Other
cultures don't do that. They do something else. We
all have our ways. Um, OK, the list is
going on because I keep giving examples, evoking the
sacred through prayer and ceremony, something humans do all
the time, Employing, um, unifying symbolism. Great example of
that, you know, the coconuts must fall, both the
coconut halves must fall this way or this way.
Can't fall this way and this way. No, you're
trying to do the ritual, but have to go
the same way. If not, grab another coconut, cut
it in half, and see which way it falls.
OK, there, now we can reconcile symbolism and, and
evoking the sacred prayers, um, so on, involving third
parties. So we've talked about that, but that's, that's
huge in these recommendations. Reconciliation rituals, they almost always
involve somebody or many somebodies else to seal the
deal, so to speak, and to signal to everybody
that this conflict is now resolved and these people
are, are mediated. And, and sometimes the, um, the
third parties. Have key roles such as mediators that
help to do this or or shaman who perform
prayers and rites and whatnot, and sometimes they're just
there to to be witnesses and participate and very
often the the some of the previous elements such
as the sharing of of food and drink is
of course involves everybody and signifies the social relationships
again. So, so these are some generalizations. That you
won't find every description saying every one, but if
you start reading 20 descriptions of reconciliation rituals, you
can just start ticking them off and find that
many of them have many and, and, and so
on and so forth. So, so it's very interesting,
and again I think it links back to just
the importance of reconciling. And it certainly links back
to one of the main conclusions from this book
is that the main purpose of conflict resolution is
to reconcile the parties, get relationships back to normal,
and then let that spread out, sometimes mentioned, sometimes
not in the ethnographies, let that spread out to
the whole community and restore normality across the community.
And that's what indigenous. As a non-Western conflict resolution
does, but that's not necessarily what conflict resolution does
in in our modern industrial states and so forth,
and I think we, we all know that. So
just to again put in a teaser about implications
here, um, if you have a judicial system, for
instance, in, in the United States, my country. Um,
WHICH is based largely on punitive measures. Notice that
that's not doing diddly squat to reconcile the people
who are there in the, in the, in the
court, uh, whether it's a civil suit or, um,
criminal suit or whatever. So it's just something to
think about. Why, why in the United States do
we put all this emphasis, contour almost every other
culture around, on punitive measures. What can we learn,
you know, what could we learn to do it
better.
Yeah, so, so do you think that perhaps something
like restorative justice could play a bigger role in
our societies?
Yes, absolutely, absolutely. Restorative justice, alternative dispute resolution, sort
of similar concepts, even things like going to community
mediation. So one case I found very interestingly from
Norway is they implemented nationwide that if you have
minors, and I think they're defining minors into mid
or low twenties, if you have young people who
have some conflict, that they're actually required to go
to mediation boards, and there are mediation boards, and
it was hugely successful for some. 90% of the
disputes between people, say age 16 and 24, I'm,
I'm, I have to check my ears, but I'm
just to give you an idea of the, of
what age we're talking about approximately, um, 90% of
them. Actually got some sort of agreement out of
the mediation that now I'll do this and I'll
do this and we agree and we're not going
to have this dispute anymore and then 90% of
those actually followed the agreement, so it was highly
successful to go at this in a way that
involved a mediation technique as opposed to a judicial
technique. Mhm. So yes, there are lots of applications.
Mhm. And one of the aspects, uh, related to
con conflict has to do with revenge. I mean,
someone is wronged or feels wronged by somebody else
and then they feel this need to uh seek
revenge to, uh, induce suffering or. Or pain or
I mean, it has a sort of a righteousness
element to it because usually people who seek revenge
also tend to think that they have been, they
have the moral high ground because they have been
wronged and so they are seeking justice in some
way. Um, I mean, anthropologically speaking, uh, how do
you approach revenge? When do people resort to revenge?
Yes, so great, I'm so glad that you remembered
to bring up revenge here for part of the
discussion. I, I agree with everything you said that
it's, it's a way to seek justice. So just
as a quick reminder, we have the umbrella of
conflict management, and revenge fits in there as just
about the only one that can be explicitly violent,
right? It doesn't always have to be violent, but
it, it can be violent, um, even to the
point of, of lethality. And we're all familiar with
Blood vengeance, for instance, and so on and so
forth. We're also pro probably all available with the
um, sorry, losing my my tongue here. We're all
familiar with the term blood money, which is a,
a, a non-violent, a non-killing alternative to um revenge
through killing, lethal, lethal killing. So there are alternatives,
many different alternatives to revenge seeking, but it is
a major force to contend with. And the other
link, of course, to make it explicit, is it's
a form of negative reciprocity. You feel that emotion,
the retributive emotion, Vestermark would say that you've been
wronged and you want to get even. So you
want, you want to give unto them as they
gave unto you in a negative sense of the
breaking golden rule, put it that way, or totally
understandable. So, so these are parts of, of human
psychology as well. And so again, if you bring
in the conflict resolution to this, the challenge becomes
how to prevent those feelings. Um, MINIMIZE those feelings
and give people alternative ways to deal with them.
So for example, imagine, you know, in, in one
of our modern industrial states with a judicial system
that's functioning reasonably well, maybe very well depending on
the country. Somebody commits a homicide, well, unless they
go confess, police investigate, gather evidence. Someone is perhaps
arrested, charged, given all the legal rights to defend
themselves, etc. ETC. They appear in court. If found
guilty, they're sentenced, and so forth. That's an alternative,
a total alternative to the victims of the family's
victims seeking. Revenge homicide seeking redress through their own
actions, taking the law into their own hands, so
we don't question that. And one of the main
reasons we don't question that is that is a
whole body is this is a society we've been
born into and raised into and taught that there's
police and courts and there's rights and there's a
process, and it's, it's not right. In fact, it's
a new crime if you were to just think
that person killed your brother or know the person
killed your brother and just go and kill him.
Now you've got a new crime and you're going
to end up in jail, more likely than not.
So we're all socialized is the key word. We're
socialized into what the norms and the values and
the processes are for our given society. So, so
whether we're living in a nomadic forager band. And
the, the norms and the values are to be
nonviolent and to never kill anybody, or we're in
a different nomadic forager band, and there it's understood
that, well, if someone's killed, the family members have
the right to kill the victim if they can.
And, and the killer understands this very well, raised
in this society, how things work, and probably takes
off for the high hills if, if he can.
And, and so, The overall point I'm trying to
make here is that socialization in this very learning
primate, this very cultural primate, has a huge influence
on how individuals act on their emotions when they've
been done a serious wrong, and most of us,
most of the time follow those norms. To be
in accordance with with the patterns and and the
values of our own culture and and our socialization
and our upbringing, occasionally we don't, right? There are
exceptions, but for the most part we do. So,
um, What Vester Mark was arguing with his emotion
is that we feel the emotions, but then there
are a variety of different ways that they can
be acted out or not. And here I'll just
take this because it's sort of an interesting example,
I think, in taking a principle and Applying it
without looking at the supporting evidence well enough. And
specifically what I'm talking about is evolutionary psychologist Dallan
Wilson wrote a really good book, really interesting book
about homicide. It's called Homicide, published in 1988. And
as part of the book, they, they take the
reciprocity principle, I don't remember if they really call
it that or not, but anyway, they, they, they
take the idea that um When someone loses a
family member, they're going to feel this desire for
revenge, and they're going to act on it. And
I hope most listeners can see a problem with
that right away, but at least I, I saw
a problem with that as an anthropologist who read
so much about different cultures. It's like, yeah, the
emotion is there, the feelings may be there, that
may be universal or near universal, and that links
back to reasons for reciprocity. Feelings and behaviors overall.
However, where I think Dallan Wilson just went really
charging off on a horse into the plains, was
that they saw this as a revenge killing, revenge
killing being the trait it was selected for, and
the anthropological data contradict that, uh, specifically. In a
cross-cultural study, about half the cultures allowed revenge homicide
and 50% did not. So clearly right there you've
got a problem with this idea of it's universally
is a desire or in fact an enactment to
kill. Desire, yeah, but that's a feeling actually carrying
through of that approximate half that allowed for revenge
killing, then there were further gradations depending on society.
So a few societies said it's a moral imperative,
you have to do it. And guess what, there
was a lot of revenge killing in those societies.
Others said, well, you know, it's, it's one thing
you can do and you probably should. But again,
not always. And then we go up to the
idea of, well, it's, it's one option among many,
but it's not really the best option. You should
do something else instead if you at all can
and so forth. So, so humans are very flexible.
We're subject to socialization. We're subject to the impact
of our own societies, the norms and values and
customs and institutions. In that sense, Revenge is is
very interesting, I think. I know we all have
that emotion. I, at least that's where I'm coming
from. Um, I had a childhood friend and, and
He used to say sometimes like if if something
horrendous happened, not horrendous, but just something annoying, say
for instance we're walking in this nice deserted area,
dirt road up in the mountains, and all of
a sudden we hear the roaring sound of a
motorcycle, and a motorcycle comes roaring by, bumping and
spewing gas and rocks and stinking and loud and
everything, and he needs a I wish I had
a bazooka.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I, I mean, uh, uh, I,
I mean, certainly when I was a child in
the 90s, we also had those kinds of, uh,
talk, uh those kinds of talks. Yeah, I, I,
I, I guess that, I, I mean, to some
extent, there's some universality to it, at least to
the, to the feelings.
Exactly. There, there's some catharsis there just to express
them. I mean, in the book, I give an
example from my, my own life where I say,
well, my first thought was I should get some
roofing nails and put them under the tires of
this guy's truck. Well, I saw a few problems
with that possibility, you know, so we have our
own restraints. Um, I don't know, did I get
to the essence of the revenge item, or did
you?
Yeah, no, no, I, I, I think so. I
mean, I was just going to say because we're
also nearing the end of our conversation here, but
I was just going to say since you mentioned
Margot Wilson's and Martin Daly's book, Homicide. Uh, YEAH,
uh, I'm an evolutionary psychologist, even more so in
recent years, uh, uh, have been annoying me a
bit because I mean, they make these very quick
jumps from seeing something as a universal or near
universal to approaching it as an evolved adaptation, and
I mean I really see that. At least most
evolutionary psychologists do not know enough anthropology, and if
you were aware of the anthropology behind a particular
kind of behavior, uh, you would know that, I
mean, some of the ones that they assume are
universal or near universal are actually not, so.
Yeah, I, I wholeheartedly concur. I mean, a paper,
I haven't had a chance to read it yet,
but it already got me annoyed. I came across
it a few days ago, just, just published, but
it was exactly along these lines of, here, here's
a list of traits why we think that it
was an adaptation for warfare. It's like, oh boy.
Well, we've already addressed that in our previous conversation.
So, um,
on that line, if, if I, I'll just mention
to you is, is something that you should know
and is, um, perhaps, uh, I'll be back at
some point before too long. My wife Janvia Suak
and I are, are working on a book right
now to sort of reevaluate and re-explore some of
these issues, so, um. To come soon.
00 yeah, yeah, yeah, please let me know when
you have your book finished because I would certainly
love to have you both on the show. I
mean, to have you back and to have your
wife for the first time on the show as
well. So, um, let me ask you now, are
there situations or contexts where conflict resolution actually does
not work?
Oh sure, I mean it's, it's not 100% effective.
I mean, 11 situation is just on a case
by case basis where you might end up with
somebody who's just really a deviant, stubborn, uh, you
know, maybe a sociopath or a psychopath or just
disturbed and it just is not going to work
for that individual type of reason. So, um, yeah,
sure. And then of course, as you might expect
in any procedure. Maybe someone still just goes away
dissatisfied, it doesn't work. Um, YEAH, it's not 100%
guaranteed it'll it'll work.
Mhm. So, and finally, in what ways can we
apply this knowledge to large scale industrialized societies?
OK, that's, that's a big question, and I, of
course I, I think I made a stab or
two along the way at, at some implications there,
but let's, I, I did jot a few notes,
uh, in, in thinking about this one. So just
to reiterate, reciprocity is at the top of my
notes, and reciprocity, if, if we go along with
the idea that it's a human universe, well, it's
going to apply across any society. I think that's
a very important one where we could look to
non-Western society, indigenous conflict resolution, and see how they
deal with this principle and certainly for us to
think. Of ourselves as being human conflict resolvers is
is a spin-off point here. That's what the anthropological
evidence, including from Western, Cultures, that's what the, the,
the universality of it all and, and the patterns
and the shared goals and the recurring themes that
we see, themes and sub-thees, it, it's all leading
towards an idea that that humans have evolved a
capacity to deal with their conflicts. They've, they've evolved
psychological and even physiological. When I try to say,
motivators, if you put it that way, to urge
us to deal with our, our conflicts and preserve
our valuable relationships and to preserve our reputations and
not to get social demerits. And, you know, here's,
here's a lot of theory that needs development. And
I would say also, you know, propositions, if we
call these hypotheses that could be investigated and looked
at more precisely. But meanwhile, the anthropological evidence speaks
pretty loudly, at least to me. Um, THAT, that
this is going on. So I like to call
it a human conflict resolution to emphasize that it's
not just something that's cultural and it's maybe here
and maybe there, and it's different and so much
variation without the themes, um, to really emphasize that
point. So another one I, I, I alluded to
before, and I'll just reiterate this briefly, is that
in the United States at least and, and some
other Western cultures. I think there's too much emphasis
on penal approach to conflict. Again, going back to
theorist Donald Black, he actually talks about 4 conflict
resolution styles. I think 3 of them were really
relevant for the book, and they are the conciliatory,
dealing with reconciliation among parties, among people. The um
compensation or recompensation um to to pay to restore
the balance in this way, a life for a
life. Pay off for a payoff, paying restitution for
something lost. You know, that's, that's extremely common. We
didn't talk too much about it. I'll just say
that is so extremely common. And again, it, it
links in my view, back to the emotions and
back to the quest for justice and fairness that,
OK, it's balanced now, you know, I did, I
did this damage to you. Now I paid you
for it, you know, we're good. And the receiver
also is more often than not, we're good. So
compensation plays out in many different ways, and again
that's a different style than the penal or the
punishment style that Black is talking about. So yeah,
the the penal style would be what we usually
refer to as retributive justice, right? No,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, yes, it would be. I
was thinking it's restored, but no, no, retributive, retributive,
retributive, yeah, that's another, another term. I mean, the
other fun. I don't want to go off on
a real tangent, but I tell my students penitentiary
penal, you know, it's the same penal system that
sort of conveys it's punishment oriented. OK. And another
implication of this about revenge is is I like
this quote from Gandhi, you know, about an eye
for an eye ends up making everybody blind. Um,
SO that's this, uh, lex talion this idea of
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, a death for a death, and so on
and so forth. It certainly exists culturally, but it
also, I would say, an implication here, um, and,
and maybe this is more international relationships than within
modern industrial nation states. But to just keep this
in mind that in our international relations, aren't, aren't
we going to deal with this in a more
respectful, less costly way? Than just, you know, evoking
this type of revenge, let's tally on this type
of approach. So there are certain nation states that
seem to fall into this easier than others. And
again, I think an important point for really discussing
and and seeing the implications is to look at
this in terms of our international relations. And in
another way, I mean, here, here's a big one,
and obviously my opinion, if if you're going to
look at Such an interdependent world today where we're
experiencing economic problems around the world due to one
person starting a war from one country or two
people from two countries starting a war. And all
the implications economically, it shows right in front of
us how interdependent we all are economically and on
fossil fuels and so on. Well, of course, we're
horribly interdependent, I should say terrifically interdependent in terms
of the climate problem, and this is something that
no country can deal with alone. We have to
work together. So if you're going to think about
conflict resolution and all the implications here. We're used
to thinking in terms of a small community or
at least a village or some sort of group
of people. Well, we can apply many of these
same principles that are in this book and that
we've talked about in terms of conflict resolution absolutely
globally, you know, regionally and globally. The same ideas
apply, and I must say in the short book
I don't talk too much about that explicitly, but
maybe that's another book, but it's it's certainly got
the implications right there in front of us. Here's
one more, and I don't think you'll see this
one coming. One thing that emerged from this is
that very often indigenous peoples in indigenous contexts. Expand
a proven technique for conflict resolution up a level,
and then maybe up another level. So for instance,
I'll take the Hanoshawnee, or also called Iroquois in
the past. Now we should call them Hanoshawnee, which
is what the people want to be called themselves.
So they had village councils to deal with disputes
and even homicides and so forth. And then they
had up the level, tribal councils to deal with
the levels of the tribal, and when they formed
their confederation. Of five nations living close together and
stopped warring with each other. Guess what? They established
the intertribal council with some of the same mechanisms
and rules. So, you know, you can take an
example from a Western court system where there's city
courts or municipal courts, and then there's of course
state courts, and there's federal courts. The idea of
adjudication in many of the same laws and processes
apply. You're upping at the level. So this relates
back to the previous point about what are the
implications for conflict resolution, avoiding war, international law, and
so forth. We need to up the level, I
would argue.
Oh, OK, so some of, some of these mechanisms
of conflict resolution can be scaled up,
right? Well, scaling up is a, a very polite,
nice way to say it, but I like to
say. Not a weird sense of humor. Maybe that's
a wonderful place to say thank you for the
interview and your comments and great questions, and it's
been a. Yeah,
no, let, let me just say again or tell
the audience again that the book is Advanced Introduction
to Conflict Resolution, and then I'm of course leaving
a link to it in the description. And Douglas,
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show again. It's been a fascinating
conversation as always, and Uh, please keep me, uh,
informed about your future book, about your next book.
So
thank you so much, Ricardo. To my pleasure and
I'll do so.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
John Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And Josnecht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.